The Project Gutenberg eBook of Arne and the Christmas star, by Alta
Halverson Seymour

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Arne and the Christmas star
       A story of Norway

Author: Alta Halverson Seymour

Illustrator: Frank Nicholas

Release Date: October 8, 2022 [eBook #69115]

Language: English

Produced by: Tim Lindell and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
             https://www.pgdp.net (This book was produced from images
             made available by the HathiTrust Digital Library.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ARNE AND THE CHRISTMAS
STAR ***






Arne and the Christmas Star


_Far out to sea, the freighter ~Stjerne~ fought the storm bravely. At
home in the little Norwegian fishing village, Arne and his family waited
and prayed. It was the Christmas season, and the ~Stjerne~ was the
Christmas ship this year, bearing Yuletide gifts and other good things
for the village._

_But more important than the gifts, the ~Stjerne~ carried her gallant
crew—and Arne’s brother Gustav, her first mate._

_How Arne does his part to help bring the Christmas ship safely into port
makes a thrilling tale._

                  By the author of THE CHRISTMAS STOVE.




                                   Arne
                                 and the
                              Christmas Star

                           _a story of Norway_

                          Alta Halverson Seymour

                             _illustrated by
                             Frank Nicholas_

                   _Wilcox and Follett Company_ CHICAGO

                       ARNE AND THE CHRISTMAS STAR
                       _by_ ALTA HALVERSON SEYMOUR
                _Copyright 1952, by Wilcox & Follett Co._
              _Manufactured in the United States of America_




                       Arne and the Christmas Star

                                 _To Todd
                    who was the first to make friends
                                with Arne_




[Illustration]

1


“Oh, Mother, I hear Uncle Jens’s folks are going up the mountain to the
saeter tomorrow. Can I go along this time, do you suppose?” Arne’s tongue
was flying as he burst into the kitchen, and his blue eyes looked eagerly
around for his mother.

No one was in sight but his grandmother, busy with her mixing bowl at
the kitchen table. “Where’s Mother, Besta?” he asked. “Cousin Bergel
just told me they’re going to take the cows and goats up the mountain
tomorrow. Do you know who all are going? Do you suppose I can—”

“For goodness’ sake, boy, you go on like a spinning wheel! It must be
that red hair of yours that drives you along so fast. Just be quiet a
minute, will you? I can only answer five or six questions at a time. Your
mother and sister Margret are over helping Aunt Tina get things ready for
the trip tomorrow.”

[Illustration]

“They’re going, then! Oh, I hope I get to go too. I think I will, don’t
you?” Arne helped himself to a bit of cooky dough from the sticky yellow
mass on his grandmother’s floured board, looking warily at her out of the
corner of his eye. Her hand was quick, and he might get a sharp rap on
the knuckles.

But he didn’t this time. She merely moved her board away from him and
began adding flour to the dough. “Such a boy!” she exclaimed. “It would
be a rest to me if your mother let you stay up on the mountain all
summer.”

Arne knew she didn’t mean that. The two were the best of friends.
Grandmother Dalen, whom everyone called Besta as a shortened form of the
dignified Norwegian _bedstemor_, seemed to enjoy his tricks and teasing.
She had even been heard to say, when she didn’t know Arne was around, “I
like naughty boys.” Then she had caught sight of him and added briskly,
“They give you something to work on.”

Now she nipped off a piece of dough and molded it into a soft long roll
which she deftly tied into a bowknot. She filled her pan with rows of
similar bowknots and slipped it into the hot oven.

“Who’s going, Besta, do you know?” asked Arne, watching the cooky-making
with interest but wishing she would hurry and answer his questions. “I
just wish we had a saeter of our own.”

[Illustration]

“Lots of use your father would have for such a thing!” scoffed Besta.

Arne’s father was in the fish-packing business and owned just enough land
to grow a little hay and keep a cow or two and some goats. But Uncle
Jens was a real farmer; and, like most farmers in Norway, he had his own
skyland pastures high in the mountain valleys where the grass grew green
and lush. These were called saeters, and each had its little cabin where
some of the daughters of the family spent their summers. The girls milked
the cows and goats which were taken from the home farm to be pastured up
there, made the cheese, and churned the butter. Arne thought some of the
best fun of the summer was at the saeter. The day of moving up there was
especially jolly.

“Cousin Signe will have to go, of course,” he said, “and Bergel, I
suppose.”

“Yes, Bergel’s old enough to help this year—almost as old as you. She’s
eleven now. Your sister Margret will take our own cows and goats up and
tend to them. And of course Uncle Jens and Aunt Tina and little Knut will
take the housekeeping things and help get the girls settled. And Cousin
Evart—”

“And me—did they say I’m going?” Arne asked eagerly, as she paused.

Besta was something the shape of one of her own butterballs, but that
did not keep her from moving fast, or talking fast either, as a rule.
Now, however, she seemed intent on her work, and when she answered she
spoke almost reluctantly. “I haven’t heard anything about your going,
Arne. I did hear your father say he needed some extra help baling
_lutfisk_. He said he was glad school is out so you can help.”

“Baling _lutfisk_!” said Arne despairingly. He had done that before,
plenty of times, especially when father had a shipment he wanted to get
off in a hurry. “That’s such a tiresome job, and so smelly! Do I have to
stay home for that stuff?”

“You like _lutfisk_ as well as anyone when it comes to the table,” Besta
reminded him. “Don’t you know how good it is, with melted butter or nice
milk gravy?”

Arne knew that well enough, but he certainly did not relish the idea of
staying home from the first saeter trip of the summer to bale _lutfisk_.
Part of the work connected with _lutfisk_ was all right. It was fun to
help unload the big cod from the fishing boats, to watch the men expertly
split and clean the fish and spread them to dry. Ole Berg, the old
fisherman who was father’s right-hand man, had showed Arne how it was
done, and even let him help.

Father thought Arne was a little young to handle the big, sharp knives,
but Ole said the boy was very quick with his hands. So Herr Dalen gave
his son a good Norwegian hunting knife with a silver handle shaped like
a horse’s head and a neat leather sheath which fitted on his belt. Arne
was very proud of it and put it to good use under Ole’s directions. But
baling those bundles of dried fish was a very different matter. And
certainly tomorrow was no day to spend on the packing-house dock at a
tedious job like that. Then a hopeful thought struck him, and he asked,
“Well, then, is Gustav going to help bale _lutfisk_ too?”

His big brother Gustav was at home just now between voyages to
sea—Gustav, who was going to be a ship’s captain some day. He would sail
as first mate the very next time the steamer _Laks_ came to port here in
Nordheim on its way up the fjord.

“What’s that about Gustav?” called out a big voice; and a tall, dark-eyed
young man with curly black hair came into the kitchen. “Oh, good for you,
Besta! You’re making _kringler_! Are those for the trip to the saeter?”

“Are you going to the saeter too, Gustav?” cried Arne accusingly. “And I
have to stay home and bale smelly old _lutfisk_!”

Disappointment swept over him. It was worse than ever if Gustav was going
and he couldn’t. There was a lump in his throat, and it seemed to him
he could hardly breathe. All spring he had been looking forward to this
trip. He longed to be in the gay procession that would wind its way from
the little village up the mountain road. Up it would go until the road
became only a path, then still up and up. At last they would come to
the little log house right on the cliff overlooking the fjord, with the
pastures and valleys behind and mountains, gray with granite and green
with pines, rising above it all.

First would go Suri, Uncle Jens’s fat, light tan fjord pony with its
black mane and tail. Arne was a great favorite of Suri’s, for he always
had a lump or two of sugar in his pocket, and she had learned to nuzzle
for it as he patted and talked to her. Suri would pull the light hay cart
piled with pots and kettles, milk pails and cans, chums and bedding, and
all the other housekeeping things. When they reached the place where the
road became no more than a trail, they would tether the pony and leave
her to spend a pleasant day cropping tender mountain grass.

Aunt Tina would drive, and little Knut would ride beside her. The girls
would be in charge of the cows and goats. Uncle Jens and Evart and
Gustav would carry big packs, because they couldn’t burden fat little
Suri too heavily. No horse-loving Norwegian would think of it.

There they would go, the bells on the pony’s harness jingling, the
cowbells ringing, little Knut tooting or whistling, everyone singing and
laughing. Even his cousin Bergel, just a girl and almost a year younger
than he was, would be in that jolly procession; and he couldn’t go. This
year it would be more fun than ever, for Gustav was going too, and there
was always a special lot of fun where Gustav was. It seemed to Arne he
would fairly burst with disappointment.

He had hard work to keep from crying, but of course you couldn’t do that
when you were twelve years old—especially when there were people around.
But his nose pricked and his throat ached; he had to wink fast and turn
and walk over to the sink as if he wanted a drink of water—which he
didn’t.

Gustav stood looking at Besta, and Besta stood looking back to him.

“You’ll be going up later on in the summer, Arne,” said Besta
comfortingly.

“I don’t care about going later,” said Arne, and his voice came out
something like a croak. “I want to go now, when Gustav’s going, and
everything getting ready—”

“I was thinking,” said Gustav slowly. “They’re going to need all the help
they can get to carry the stuff from where we leave Suri. Arne’s a pretty
big boy now, and he could be a lot of help. I know that’s one of the
reasons they want me to go.”

“They want you because everyone wants to have you around,” said Arne,
his voice still muffled. But the heavy feeling in his chest lightened
a little, and he turned half around, looking hopefully at his brother.
Gustav was pretty good at finding a way out of things.

Gustav said, “_Lutfisk_ could be baled tonight as well as tomorrow.
Father wants to have the shipment ready to send off day after tomorrow,
that’s all. We can work down there tonight. It’s light on the dock till
nearly midnight, these June nights.”

“We?” Arne’s grin began to break out. “Do you mean you’re going to help?”

“Why not? I baled _lutfisk_ when I was smaller than you are, and helped
pack the kegs of pickled herring too, sampling as I packed. I used to
kind of like to hang around that packing house. And it’s fun to think
of fish from the little port of Nordheim going all over, even as far as
America. Come on, boy.”

Arne dashed joyfully across the room. “Say, I like to hang around the
warehouse, too, but I can do that any time, and the saeter—well, that’s
different. And this year Uncle Jens is going to rig up an extra good kind
of special works to send the milk cans and hay from the top of the cliff
down to the level land. We’ve been talking a lot about it. I want to help
with that.”

“Well, why not? You’re pretty good at that kind of thing. Now we’ll go
down to the packing house, and I’ll show you how to grab up those stiff
old _lutfisk_ and wind the wire around in a hurry. I’ve got a good
technique. We’ll work fast, and if we get enough done, maybe Father will
let you go tomorrow.”

The two brothers did not have very far to go, although their white house
with its red roof and doors stood near the edge of the little harbor
town far up on the Norwegian coast, where a mighty fjord joins the sea.
They walked quickly along the narrow, cobbled street that twisted its
way down to the wharf, past the brightly-painted houses—orange, green,
and red—past the _stavkirke_ with its roofs and gables rising one above
another.

Arne liked that old church. He liked the carved dragon heads which sprung
from the highest gables and rose above the small turret that topped the
whole edifice.

“We’re lucky to have it, you know,” said Gustav. “There aren’t many of
those old churches around Norway, and none at all anywhere else. It’s
nearly a thousand years old; did you know that? It’s lasted since the
days the old Vikings used to have to carry spears or bows and arrows when
they went to church.”

“I like those old Vikings. And those were good days, Gustav,” said Arne.
“They didn’t have to be sending _lutfisk_ to America in those days.”

Gustav laughed. “Well, we do. So shake a leg.”

The packing house stood at the edge of the fjord, handy for unloading the
fishing boats and for loading the ships that carried the kegs and cans
and bales of fish to far-off ports.

Father was a little surprised to see them; and he was pleased, too,
though he didn’t say so. Usually he had to make it very clear when he
expected Arne to report for duty. And here the boy had come down himself
and offered to help. Here was Gustav, too, who was on a vacation and not
expected to do real work.

Gustav did have a very quick way of handling that _lutfisk_. He picked
up several of the long stiff pieces of fish which Arne thought looked
exactly like pieces of wood. These he arranged neatly in a bundle, bound
it with wire, fastened and clipped it. As he worked, he sang some of the
rollicking folk songs Besta had taught them long ago; and that made the
job go even faster. Old Ole worked with them; he knew songs Arne had
never heard. Before long Father joined the group; and by the time they
stopped for supper, a good share of the work was out of the way.

“There, now,” said Father with satisfaction. “We are going to see to
it that those poor folks in America do not starve for good Norwegian
_lutfisk_. Time to stop for supper. I wonder what Mother will have for us
to eat.”

“Hope it won’t be _lutfisk_,” said Arne fervently, and they all laughed.

When they entered the kitchen a few minutes later, they were pleased to
see that Mother was cooking a large pan of meat balls.

Arne thought his mother was very pretty, with her coppery hair that shone
like one of her own brightly-polished pots, her deep blue eyes and quick
smile. And he knew very well she was the most comfortable person in the
world to be around. There was a capable air about her that made one feel
good inside.

His mouth watered as she filled a large platter with meat balls while
Margret set big mugs of milk on the table and Besta brought a large bowl
of steaming hot potatoes. It was a favorite meal of Arne’s, but for once
he was the first to finish. He ran around the table to bow to his mother
and father with the customary Norwegian, “_Tak for mad_,” which meant,
“Thank you for the meal.” Then he said, “Now, let’s get back to that
_lutfisk_.”

Father glanced at Mother, and his voice sounded as if he wanted to smile.
But all he said was, “I’m afraid Arne is working himself out of a job.”

Mother had been talking to Besta, and now she answered soberly, though
her eyes twinkled. “It may be he will have to go along on that saeter
trip and help there, if he’s so eager to work.”

Arne looked from one to the other. They sounded serious, but they often
joked that way. He grinned and brought his hands together in a noisy
clap. “Am I going to the saeter, then?”

“Let’s see how we get along this evening with the work,” was all Father
would say. But Arne’s heart felt light as he went back to the dock with
the others. His fingers flew, and he sang louder than anyone.




[Illustration]

2


The sun was still high in that land of the midnight sun when Father said,
“Past nine o’clock. Time for a boy to be in bed if he’s to be up early to
start for the saeter.”

“Oh, Father! I can go?” cried Arne.

“Well, the _lutfisk’s_ nearly all baled. We don’t want you around here
tomorrow eating up all the pickled herring. Uncle Jens is going to need
help. See that you give it to him.”

“Oh, I will! Oh yes, sir!” cried Arne joyfully.

He wanted to say a special thank-you to Gustav for making it possible,
but he didn’t quite know how. Gustav was likely to make a joke of things,
and this wasn’t a joke at all. He did look up at his big brother, half
shyly, as they walked up the hill toward home, and say, “I’m glad I am
going. It was your doing, really.”

“Oh that was just because I wanted you to carry the heaviest loads,”
said Gustav, with a wink. “I plan to take it easy. Don’t you loaf on the
job, boy.”

He smiled and gave a friendly yank at a lock of Arne’s red hair, and the
boy felt so happy he ran and jumped nearly all the way home.

It was still broad daylight when Arne tumbled into his feather bed and
pulled another feather bed over him for covering. June nights grew cold
along the fjord.

It seemed to him he had hardly fallen asleep when his sister Margret was
calling, “Get up, lazybones, if you want to come with the rest of us.”

Almost before Arne had finished his breakfast of mush and milk and
cheese, he heard a clatter on the upper road behind the house and dashed
out.

There they all came, just as he had pictured it. His cousin Bergel ran to
meet him, her blue eyes shining. “Can you go, Arne?” she cried, and at
his nod, “Oh, good! I like it lots better if you’re along.”

“So do I,” said Arne, and they both laughed.

He adjusted his pack and fell in with Gustav and Uncle Jens and Evart.
Margret, flushed and pretty, ran around trying to persuade their two
cows and the goats to fall in with the others. Arne would have enjoyed
helping her with that, but cows and goats were definitely the province
of womenfolk. He knew very well that Margret didn’t want any interference
from him. Bergel and Signe came to her aid; and soon the procession was
on its way, bells ringing, everyone singing and waving and laughing,
while Mother and Father and Besta called out, “A pleasant trip!” “Good
luck!” “God be with you!”

The road ran at first along the foot of the mountain. It was a good road,
though there were fences across it in many places, marking someone’s land
boundary. But each fence had a gate which was opened to let the little
cavalcade through, and then carefully closed. Before long they branched
off to a road which climbed the mountain ever more steeply and presently
turned into a trail. Here they tethered fat little Suri, and the cart’s
load was divided among them. The men would have to make more than one
trip down to get the rest of the goods.

Arne had been here many times before, and he rushed ahead so fast that
Uncle Jens called him a mountain goat and told him not to fall into the
fjord if he got to the saeter before the others.

[Illustration]

They came at last to a log cabin with a sod roof. Pansies and bluebells
were growing on the roof, and even a few little bushes and a tiny birch
tree. The cabin stood in a wide clearing not far from the edge of the
cliff which overlooked the fjord. Little Knut had to be tethered to a
tall fir tree for safety.

The older girls drove the cattle and goats into the pastures which sloped
through the valley up toward the mountain.

Bergel wanted to go and gather wild flowers. “Come on, Arne,” she urged.
“There are foxgloves up here, and wild pansies and—”

“Oh, let’s go fishing,” Arne answered. “You can get wild flowers any
time.”

“That’s right, do that,” said Aunt Tina. “We could use some nice mountain
trout. But first get in some wood, you two. It’s high time for midmorning
coffee.”

“Evart, let’s you and me get another load from the cart, and then go
fishing with Bergel and Arne as soon as we’ve had coffee,” said Gustav.
“All right with you?”

“I’m always ready to go fishing,” replied Evart, with a grin.

“I’ll help get the load up; then I must get busy fixing our milk-can
elevator,” said Uncle Jens. “I’ve arranged with my neighbor to see to the
end of it down at the bottom.”

Arne was delighted to have the older boys in the fishing party. They were
really experts, and he liked to watch them. Also they knew the best
spots to fish. Up the trail a little way was a clear, deep stream, and
there they soon got all the mountain trout they could use. Arne himself
caught six, and Bergel four.

“Oh, I wish we could stay all summer,” said Arne. “Don’t you, Gustav?”

Gustav laughed. “This isn’t man’s work,” he declared. “This is just fun.”

“You’re getting anxious to sail off,” said Evart. “When do you go?”

“The _Laks_ arrives in a few days. Then it will go up the fjord with me
on it,” said Gustav. He sounded happy at the prospect, but Arne’s heart
sank. He didn’t like to think of Gustav going away again.

“Wish I could go,” said Arne, with a gusty sigh. “I haven’t even been on
a boat and bicycle trip yet like some of the boys.”

“You’re too young,” said Bergel in her practical way. “And you haven’t a
bicycle.”

Gustav looked thoughtfully at his brother as they walked down to the
cabin. “Could be we might take you along on one trip on the _Laks_, Arne.
Put you to work, you know, swabbing the deck and peeling potatoes and all
kinds of things.”

“Oh, boy!” cried Arne. “Do you think I could, Gustav? And say, if you’re
going to be going up and down the fjord, you can touch home every now and
then.”

“That’s just for a few trips,” said Gustav. “Then I sail with Captain
Olsen on the _Stjerne_. He says that will be the Christmas boat this
year.”

“Oh, good, the Christmas _Star_!” cried Bergel, for _Stjerne_ is the
Norwegian word for star. “That will be just right. It’ll be fun to have
you on the Christmas boat.”

“First he goes clear to South America. Don’t you, Gustav?” said Arne
proudly.

“Yes, to South American ports and others too. We’ll bring back meat and
fruit and grain and unload a lot of it at Oslo. Then we’ll take on more
cargo—mostly Christmas things—and make the Christmas trip up the coast.”

“And bring in toys and candies and fruit and nuts and gifts and
everything nice,” said Arne, his eyes glowing. “And you’ll stay home for
Christmas, won’t you?”

“Yes, Captain Olsen says the Christmas crew should be home for Christmas.
Nordheim is one of the last stops before Captain Olsen’s home at Tromsö,
where they’ll put in for a couple of weeks or more. One of the other boys
will take my place for that short pull.”

“Everyone’s going to be glad to see that Christmas boat come in,” said
Evart.

“And Mother’ll be glad right now to see these fish come in,” remarked
Bergel.

Aunt Tina and the girls stopped their work of scrubbing every floor and
wall and stick of furniture in the cabin to admire the morning’s catch.
Bergel stayed to help with the cleaning, and the boys went to help Uncle
Jens, who was busy with wires and tools.

Uncle Jens had had a wire elevator before this for use in sending down
milk cans and hay, but he felt it had been a somewhat makeshift affair.
This year he wanted it to be strong and secure enough for any reasonable
load, for his herd was an extra large one.

Arne liked this kind of a job, and he felt proud to be working with Uncle
Jens and Gustav and Evart. Strong wires were fastened securely to trees
and firmly anchored below to posts driven at some distance from the foot
of the cliff. A milk can or a large bundle of hay could be sent down
those wires in a rope sling, easily and swiftly.

When the little elevator was ready at last, Uncle Jens said they must
send down a large milk can to make sure everything was all right. They
filled one with water, tied it securely with a heavy rope, and watched as
it slid and swayed its way down. Then the wires were tightened again,
and they drew the milk can up and made more tests.

“I think it will do,” Uncle Jens said at last.

With all the outdoor air and work, Arne was getting hungry again. So were
the others, and every one was glad when Aunt Tina appeared with a large
white coffeepot. “Time for afternoon coffee,” she called.

Gustav sat where he could look out over the fjord, as if he hoped he
might see the _Laks_ coming in ahead of time. Suddenly he gave an
exclamation and jerked his field glasses out of his pocket. “Some kid
down there has turned over in a sailboat!” he exclaimed, jumping up and
rushing to the cliff edge. The others followed.

“Don’t believe that kid knows much about swimming,” Gustav said, taking
another quick look through his glasses. “He isn’t making for shore—just
trying to hang on to that capsized boat. That’s slippery business. The
water’s deep and cold.”

“It’s Oscar Blessom’s boat!” cried Arne. “But Oscar’s on a bicycle trip.
Must be Torger! He isn’t very big, and I know he can’t swim much. And
there’s no one near enough to see or help him.” Arne looked at Gustav
hopelessly. Not even Gustav could help now.

But Gustav’s lips were set, and he went quickly toward the wire elevator.

“What are you going to do?” cried Margret anxiously.

“Go down the wires,” said Gustav tersely.

“Oh, you can’t! You can’t do that!” protested Aunt Tina and the girls.
“It isn’t strong enough! It wasn’t made for a man.”

“Got to try it. Don’t see any other way. Got to get there fast or it will
be too late. Have you got some cloths, Aunt Tina? I have to wind them
around my hands, or they’ll be torn on the wires so I can’t use them.”

Aunt Tina flew for cloths and wound them quickly around his hands while
Uncle Jens and Evart made a rope loop for Gustav to sit in.

All this was speedily accomplished. Uncle Jens and Evart helped adjust
him in the loop while Arne watched, proud of Gustav, fearful he might get
hurt, afraid he might not get there in time.

“Here I go,” said Gustav. “Hold onto that rope, Uncle Jens, tight as you
can.”

The group at the top of the cliff watched breathlessly as Gustav went
down. At first the wires swayed dangerously under his weight. Arne’s
heart seemed to come right up into his throat. Gustav was a good deal
heavier than a full milk can. But he adjusted his weight to one side and
another and then shot down swiftly.

The moment Gustav reached level ground, he jumped free of the rope.
Torger must have lost his hold now. They could see that the boat had
drifted away. Gustav knew that, too, for he was racing toward the water,
pulling off his coat as he ran. He snatched off his shoes and plunged in.

[Illustration]

Arne wished he had field glasses so that he could see every detail of
what was going on. He could tell that Gustav was moving fast. But would
he get there in time?

“He’s making it,” said Uncle Jens, his voice full of relief. “He’s got
hold of whoever it is. Bringing him in to shore.”

“It’s Torger Blessom, all right,” said Arne. Gustav had the little boy on
shore now. He laid him down on a large rock and bent over him, working
quickly.

Arne looked at the wires and then at his uncle. Gustav could use some
help down there. If they’d pull the rope right back up, maybe he could
muster the courage to go down those wires as Gustav had done.

But to his relief, Uncle Jens said, “See, he has Torger on his feet.
He’ll be all right now.”

“We must be thinking of getting started, now,” said Aunt Tina. “We can’t
go down like Gustav. We have to take the long way around. I’ll be up in
a week or two, Signe, and give you a hand with making the cheese. And
Bergel can help. She’s eleven now, and it is time she learned.”

Bergel smoothed her apron as they walked toward the cabin. She felt
pleased and proud that Arne had heard her mother say this. He sometimes
acted as if he didn’t think girls amounted to much. But she liked him
and longed for his good opinion.

“Arne, you come again,” said Bergel. “We’ll go fishing.”

“We’ll be up, all of us, from time to time,” said Aunt Tina, who loved
the mountain saeter as much as anyone. It made her feel like a girl
again to be up here, for in her younger days she too had had her turn at
tending cows and goats on the mountain in summer, at caring for the milk
and making the cheese. “Just for tonight I want to be the first to blow
the saeter horn. Run and get it, Bergel.”

Bergel ran into the house and came out with a long wooden horn, which she
handed to her mother. The little girl longed to try it herself. They had
told her, other summers, that she was too little; but perhaps if she was
considered big enough to help with the cheese, she might be big enough to
blow the horn, too.

She watched eagerly as her mother lifted it to her lips and blew a deep,
mellow blast to call the cows home. Then, to her delight, her mother
handed it to her and said, “You try it, Bergel. It will take more than
one blast to bring the cows home.”

Perhaps Bergel would have blown a good blast the first time if Arne
had not stood mimicking her, pretending with great effort to lift an
imaginary horn to his lips, puffing out his cheeks, pursing his lips, and
bringing out a small squeak.

Bergel had to laugh, and so did the others. But Margret gave her brother
a brisk shake and told him to try to behave himself for once. “Try again,
Bergel,” she said. This time the little girl managed to bring out, if not
as long and deep a blast as her mother had, at least a very creditable
sound.

The girls would have to go out into the woods and valleys and up the
mountainside to get some of the goats and even some of the cows, for
the first few evenings at any rate. But before long, most of them would
answer the call of the saeter horn.

The bells on the cows and goats were ringing over the valleys, and the
saeter horn sounded again and again through the clear mountain air as
they started down the path, Arne running ahead of everyone.

It had been a wonderful day, but he was glad to be going home. He wanted
to hear all about the rescue of Torger Blessom, to see Torger himself
and make sure he was all right. And he wanted very much to find out how
Gustav felt going down those wires.




[Illustration]

3


Gustav only laughed when Arne asked him how it felt to go down those
wires. “You’ll really have to try it yourself to find out,” he said. “It
wasn’t much. Now you’d better run over and see Torger.”

Torger was still a little pale and more than a little mortified over his
accident. “Gustav said he’d give me a lesson in handling a boat,” he told
Arne. “He said maybe we could go out tomorrow, the three of us.”

“If Gustav teaches you, believe me, you’ll learn how,” said Arne. “He’s
the one who taught me to sail and swim. Wonder why your brother Oscar
didn’t teach you.”

“They are too near of an age,” said Torger’s mother. “Gustav is quite a
bit older than you, and you are willing to learn from him. When Oscar
tries to show Torger how to do something, it generally ends up in a
fight.”

The boys couldn’t help grinning, for they knew Fru Blessom was right.

The next morning, Gustav took both boys out on the fjord. There was a
stiff wind blowing, and the sailboat was not easy to manage. He said it
would be good experience for Arne, and that if Torger learned in this
wind, he’d never be afraid of a sailboat. Gustav was thorough in his
instructions, and both boys worked manfully.

“I’ve got the hang of it now,” Torger said confidently. “I bet I won’t
turn over in a boat again.”

“I don’t believe you will, Torger,” said Gustav. “Now you two lads be
sure to get out on the fjord and sail every chance you have. The best
summer fun in the world is on a fjord.”

“And the best thing to have fun with is a boat,” said Arne.

“You’re right about that,” Gustav agreed heartily. Then he gave a sudden
exclamation, “Put her hard over to the left, Arne! We’re going in now as
fast as we can! Do you see what’s coming in from the sea? The _Laks_ is
almost in port.”

Gustav sounded very happy, but Arne’s heart felt heavy as he steered
toward shore. It had been such fun to have his brother home, and the time
had gone all too quickly. Now it would be months before he would be here
for more than a short visit.

But Gustav wouldn’t let anyone be gloomy today. No sooner had they tied
the little sailboat up at the warehouse dock than he was rushing toward
the big wharf, the younger boys beside him.

“From the way Arne’s going, I’ll have to hurry to get there first. He’ll
be going as first mate in my place, or maybe skipper,” Gustav called out.

He stopped to smooth his hair and shake his coat into place before he
talked to the captain. After that he hurried home to get his things,
which were ready packed.

Besta and Mother came back with him, and Father, too, came down to
the wharf to see him off. Half the town was gathering there, indeed,
especially the boys and girls. They liked to watch the boat unload its
cargo of mail and freight and take on other cargo to go up through the
fjord.

Arne and Torger watched as a bright new spinning wheel was unloaded.
“That’s for my grandmother,” said Torger, “and about time, too. She’s
been complaining that she wouldn’t have wool ready for the Christmas
knitting if that wheel didn’t come soon.”

Crates of oranges from America were next, boxes of groceries and
drygoods, and windows for the new house going up at the edge of town.
There was not very much to load on the boat here. The fish from the
packing house went to ports farther away. Towns along the fjord could
catch their own fish. There was mail to go. A few passengers got on. Arne
saw a group of boys on board with sleeping bags and rucksacks. He knew
their bicycles were stowed away somewhere and that they were on a holiday
jaunt up the fjords and over the mountains. One of these days he’d be
going on such a jaunt, too.

A little flutter of interest in the crowd made him turn quickly. To his
surprise, he saw Uncle Jens coming down the street, leading Suri. He went
straight over to the captain and said, “I want to send Suri up to Blegen
for a little while. My wife’s brother needs an extra pony to help with
some farm work, and I can spare Suri just now. So can you take her aboard
and make her comfortable?”

“_Ja, Ja_, certainly we can take care of Suri,” the captain assured him.

But Suri did not seem to care for such a trip in the least. A broad band
was securely fastened around her and a derrick swung over to lift her
aboard. But little Suri stamped and champed and lifted her head, her eyes
rolling in fright as she complained in loud whinnies.

No one thought of such a thing as trying to force the little mare aboard.
Uncle Jens talked to her, and she quieted down a bit; but when the
derrick came toward her again, once more she backed and stamped and
whinnied nervously.

The other loading was finished. The sailors were closing the holds. But
the _Laks_ could not weigh anchor because little Suri, in spite of all
wheedling, was flatly refusing to go aboard.

Arne only wished he had the chance Suri was refusing, but nevertheless he
felt very sorry for the frightened little horse. Perhaps he could coax
her a bit—he had done it often enough before.

He went over to try, fishing in his pockets as he went. Yes, there were
two lumps of sugar. He put an arm over Suri’s neck and offered her one,
talking to her softly the while. She nuzzled her soft brown nose into his
hand and seemed to feel comforted.

“Go on, Arne,” Uncle Jens encouraged him. “She seems to listen to you.”

So Arne stood there, coaxing little Suri, feeding her sugar, talking to
her, patting her, until she stopped trembling and champing and at last
let him fasten the big hook in the band which was fastened firmly about
her. Then he ran onto the boat and stood there talking to her from the
deck. Now at last she let them swing her aboard, and though she stamped
anxiously at first, she allowed Arne to take the band off and lead her
down into the hold.

“Wish I could go along with you, Suri,” he said, putting his cheek
against her neck and giving her a pat.

[Illustration]

Gustav had come down to see that everything was in good order, and now he
gave his young brother an encouraging nod. “That was a pretty good job,
Arne; you saved the skipper a lot of time, and that may turn out to be a
good thing.”

“Do you think he might let me go on the boat some time, Gustav?” asked
Arne eagerly.

“I can’t promise a thing yet. You skip ashore now, and we’ll see. The
ship’s bell is ringing. They want to get started. And our captain
wouldn’t care for a stowaway aboard, I know that.”

So it came about that Arne was laughing as he ran down the gangplank just
as they were about to pull it up. And instead of feeling sad as the boat
steamed away with Gustav aboard, he was thinking of the day when he might
be aboard too.

He looked up to see his father standing there, smiling down at him. “I
thought for a minute there I was going to have two sons on that ship this
time,” he said. “Looked to me as if the captain could find a use for you.”

“Oh, I wish I could be aboard, especially when the _Stjerne_ sails out,”
said Arne, heaving a great sigh. “That’s the life, isn’t it, Father?”

His father laughed, a contented, good-natured laugh. “That’s the natural
way for a Norwegian boy to feel, I guess. I did my share of sailing, too,
in my early days. But I understand there’s such a thing as school. I
hear boys are expected to go to that in Norway.”

Arne knew his father was joking; so he smiled back, though school never
seemed to him a very good subject for a joke. “I suppose so,” he said.
“But I like outdoor things so much better than schoolwork. I just wish it
were summer all the year around.”

Arne was not the only one who wished it were summer all the year around.
Up at the saeter, the girls were having a merry time in spite of the
work of caring for the cows and goats, milking and making cheese. There
were berry-picking excursions through the woods and valleys to gather
blueberries, raspberries, and the lovely bright _multer_ berries which
grew thick and red on their low bushes. There were visits with girls in
neighboring saeters and fishing trips up the mountain.

“Don’t forget I’m to learn to make cheese,” Bergel reminded Signe one day.

“Oh, yes. Mother wouldn’t like it a bit if we didn’t get that tended to.
We’ll start with _gammelost_. That’s best, anyway.”

Under Signe’s direction, Bergel warmed the milk and let it stand until
the curds and whey could be separated. Then she dried the curds,
crumbling them carefully with her hand, and set it all aside to ripen.
Signe even let her add the caraway seed and salt.

When it was brought out some days later for inspection, Margret looked at
it with approval. “We should save that for company,” she said, sniffing
with appreciation.

Bergel nodded, looking very grown-up as she tasted it with a businesslike
air and added a little more salt. Then she put it away in a covered jar
to ripen further. “I hope the company will be Arne and Evart and some
of the other boys,” she said, and though the other girls laughed, they
agreed with her.

Down in the town, Arne was keeping busy, too. He had jobs of many kinds
at home, running errands and getting in the wood for the old cookstove
Besta preferred to Mother’s new electric range. And he had to help Besta
cut the hay in the little patch of ground that sloped from their house up
the mountain. It was fun to get in there with a scythe, and to help Besta
and Mother hang the hay over the wooden hay fences to dry before it could
mildew on the damp ground.

He helped around the packing house, too. There were errands there as well
as at home, and there was cleaning to do, and packing. Sometimes he was
allowed to go out with the fishermen. He especially liked to go with
Ole to fish for _torsk_ and herring and halibut. Sometimes they took a
rowboat or a small sailboat up the fjord. Sometimes they took Ole’s big
boat and went out to sea.

There was time for play, too, in the summer afternoons and long, light
evenings. More than once Arne went away on a day’s jaunt with Oscar and
Torger and half a dozen other boys. They sailed and swam and fished on
the fjord, and took long hikes up and down the fjord path and up the
mountainside.

But Arne never let any of his activities keep him from being right on the
dock when the _Laks_ was due. Each time he hoped to hear the glad news
that he was to be on board when the ship weighed anchor. Each time he
asked Gustav eagerly if he was to go on this trip.

When two or three weeks went by with no invitation for Arne, he began to
lose hope. But then one day Gustav jumped off the gangplank calling out,
“Where’s that Arne? You better go get some packing done, boy.”

“Really, Gustav? Do I go this time?” cried Arne.

“Looks that way,” answered Gustav. “The skipper says we’re bringing Suri
back this trip, and you’d be a good one to have aboard to help with that.”

Arne gave a big, “Oh!” on a deep, blissful sigh, and was off up the hill
like a shot to tell Mother the good news and to see to that all-important
packing. He had a lot of things he wanted to take, and he had a feeling
Mother wouldn’t think half of them were necessary.

“We’ll be here for a couple of hours, at least,” Gustav called after him.
“Tell Mother to put the coffeepot on.”

Arne loved that journey up and down the fjord, stopping at each small
village with mail and freight. There were a few passengers, and he liked
to see them get off amid the joyful greetings of their friends. Often
they were met by a light boat which would take them aboard and then skim
swiftly and quietly off to some town across the fjord or to some nearby
farm.

He made friends with a little party of English lads who had bicycles on
board and planned to leave the boat at the head of the fjord and go off
through the valleys and over the mountains which Arne taught them to call
by the Norwegian name of _fjelds_. He wished he had a sleeping bag like
theirs and that he could sleep out with them on deck, though they told
him it got pretty cold.

They let him share some of the meals they cooked over their tiny portable
stove, and Gustav saw to it that he contributed fish balls or cheese or
some other delicacy.

On the afternoon the _Laks_ neared the head of the fjord, Gustav was at
the wheel and Arne stood near him, watching the waterfalls dash violently
down the high, steep mountain walls.

Suddenly he gave a shout, “Gustav, look out! Rocks falling! Big ones!
Right ahead!”

Gustav gave one quick look, and his face was grim. Arne’s heart beat
fast. He knew it would be terribly dangerous to hit those rocks here
where the _Laks_ steamed between sheer mountain walls. But he saw that
his brother wasn’t losing his head for a moment. He was proud of the
resolute look on Gustav’s white face, the sure, firm way he managed to
turn the wheel and guide the boat to avoid the rocks.

The captain came running up, his face as pale as Gustav’s. “Good work,
Gustav,” was all he said, but his relief was plain to see.

At the head of the fjord, the English boys left them, though they stayed
on the dock to watch little Suri taken aboard.

Arne kept a sharp lookout for falling rocks as they steamed homeward
between the steep rocky cliffs. He was glad when they came to the places
where the country flattened out a bit and there was room for a small
village or a few farms at the foot of the mountain. Often he caught a
glimpse of a saeter high above them.

“Do you think we’re going to get up to the saeter again this summer?” he
asked Gustav, after one such glimpse. “I know the girls are counting on
it.”

“I’ll have two or three days between my last trip on the _Laks_ and the
time the _Stjerne_ sails,” said Gustav. “That will be early in August.
Let’s go then.”

“Shall I make a trip up and tell the girls?” asked Arne eagerly. “They’ll
have a lot of getting ready to do—a lot of baking and things.”

“You hope,” said Gustav, laughing. “Well, I hope so too, Arne. So we’ll
figure out the time and you can hike up that mountain and tell them about
it.”

Arne had made many pleasant journeys to the saeter, but there had never
been one as gay as the trip up there with Gustav and Evart and a dozen
other lads.

“Look! Look what the girls are using for pasture!” cried Arne, as they
came in sight of the saeter. A shout of laughter went up, for Bergel had
tethered a small white kid to the tiny birch tree on the roof of the
cabin.

[Illustration]

The shout brought out the girls, gay in their special holiday dresses.
Arne thought they looked very pretty in their full, striped skirts with
crisp, lace-trimmed white aprons and bright laced bodices over white
blouses. A hand-made silver brooch fastened each blouse at the throat.
Margret’s brooch was handed down to her by Besta, Arne knew; and he
thought it was the prettiest one of all. These brooches were treasured
possessions in Norwegian families.

Signe and Margret and Bergel had invited girls from neighboring saeters,
and a good thing, too, for Gustav had brought his accordion and Evart his
fiddle. There was dancing and singing and laughter under the trees. Arne
and Bergel joined in the fun, for they could do the old folk dances as
well as any of them.

Then a feast was spread out on the long table—fish and cheese and _lefse_
and big bowls of berries with whipped cream, and _kringler_ and cakes and
cookies of all kinds. Bergel’s _gammelost_ was praised enough to make the
young cheesemaker very proud.

The fun stopped toward evening, but only long enough for the girls to
get in the cows and goats and do their milking, to make fresh coffee and
replenish the dishes on the table. Then the dancing started again and
went on far into the long summer evening.

At last the party from the village started down the trail for home,
reluctantly, to be sure, but singing and laughing nevertheless.

It was a sleepy Arne who tumbled into his feather bed at last. This had
been a long day, but a wonderful one.




[Illustration]

4


The _Stjerne_ came into port a few days later, and Gustav sailed away as
first mate. He was so happy about it that Arne couldn’t help feeling some
of that happiness too. He remembered what fun it had been to go up the
fjord on the _Laks_, and he didn’t blame anyone for wanting to go to sea.

But Gustav was sailing far away this time, all the way to South America,
touching at many ports on the voyage. It would be a long time before he
returned.

“Oh, Gustav!” The words fairly burst from Arne as he stood watching the
final packing. “I wish South America wasn’t so far away!”

Perhaps Gustav knew how he would have felt if he had been in Arne’s
place. He put his arm around Arne’s shoulder and said, “Look here,
fellow, I’ve got something I want to leave with you. Father gave me new
field glasses as a parting gift. I want you to have my old ones.”

“For keeps?” cried Arne. It would be wonderful to have those glasses.

“For keeps,” said Gustav, and was fully rewarded by Arne’s shining face.

“Now you can watch us till we get clear out to sea and turn down the
channel between the shore and the islands. In fact, if you go up on the
cliff, you can watch us farther than that.”

“Oh, I will! Oh, Gustav! And I’ll be watching when the time comes for you
to come home, too, you can bet on that.”

The gift took most of the sadness out of the parting, though Gustav would
be gone now until December when the _Stjerne_ would come in with its load
of Christmas goods. Then he would be home all through the holidays. That
was something to look forward to.

The rest of the summer slipped quickly away. It was time for the girls to
come home from the saeter, and Arne went with Uncle Jens and the others
to help bring down the girls and the gear, the cows and the calves, the
goats and the kids and the cheeses.

School was to start the next week, and he felt a little dismal about
it as he talked it over with Bergel. “I hear that new teacher is very
strict—Herr Professor Engstrand. Oscar said Pastor Beckstrom’s son told
him so.”

Bergel nodded. “I heard so, too. But maybe we have to expect that, now
that we’re going to be in the upper room. Just think, Arne. We’ll start
learning English, and do a lot of things we couldn’t do before.” Bergel,
very quick at her lessons, was in the same grade as her cousin.

“I’ll like being in the same room with Nels and Oscar and those boys
instead of a lot of little kids,” Arne admitted.

“Yes, I think it’s wonderful we’re going to be in with the upper grades.
And a man teacher. Makes me feel pretty grown-up.”

Arne was surprised when he entered school that first morning and got
his first glimpse of Herr Professor Engstrand. Somehow, from Oscar’s
remarks, he had expected to see an elderly gentleman. Herr Professor
didn’t look much older than Gustav. But he certainly was not like Gustav
in any other way. There was no laughter in those stern gray eyes, and his
mouth, straight and firm, didn’t look as if it ever even smiled. He stood
stiffly beside his desk, his shoulders squared.

When the school was assembled, he made a short speech. “I am new here,”
he said, “but we shall soon get to know one another. If you do your
work well, we shall get along without trouble. I shall put up with no
laziness, no disobedience. You are old enough to know how to work, and
that is exactly what I expect you to do.” His words were clipped and
curt, and Arne was sure you could have heard a pin drop in that quiet
room. Lessons were assigned and classes were held in the most methodical
order. Any lack of attention, any slightest sign of disorder, was
promptly reprimanded or punished more severely.

[Illustration]

Arne very soon made up his mind about one thing. He would try to obey
orders to the letter. He could see there would be trouble ahead if he did
anything else. He didn’t know, of course, that this was Herr Professor
Engstrand’s first school and that he was desperately anxious to make a
good job of it.

Winter set in early, and it was always a relief to Arne to get out of
school. He liked to get his skis and go flying down the steep slopes
behind the town with Nels and Oscar and Torger and some of the other
boys. Evart was away at school this year, and sometimes Arne took Bergel
with him coasting. She knew how to steer the long sled almost as well as
he did.

He would stop at home in the kitchen first, for he was sure to find
Mother and Besta having a cup of afternoon coffee. Sometimes Aunt
Tina would be there, too, and Signe and Margret. Sometimes one of the
neighbors would come in. But whether there was company or not, there was
sure to be something good to go with the coffee—slices from a big, round
loaf of ryebread with _gjetost_, Besta’s special goats’ milk cheese, or
coffeecake, or _bakkelse_—crisp, delicious little cakes fried in deep
fat, or some other of their many specialties. Mother and Besta were as
good cooks as you’d find in all Norway, Father often said; and he added
that that was saying a lot, for Norway was famous for its good cooks.

Sometimes as he came in, after skiing or skating or coasting, he would
hear Besta’s spinning wheel whirring comfortably away. She liked to
spin the wool for her knitting and weaving. Even Margret, up-to-date as
she considered herself, preferred the soft wool her grandmother spun to
any other. Besta never looked as contented as when her foot was on that
treadle, her practiced hand drawing out the fine strong woolen yarn.

Arne usually came from school with a rush and a bang. But one day he came
into the kitchen without saying a word. Bergel was with him, and she too
was quiet.

“Fresh _lefse_, Arne,” said his mother.

Arne nodded, but for once he didn’t make a move to take any.

Besta looked at him keenly. “Trouble in school, Arne?” she asked.

Arne’s face darkened, and he doubled up his fists. “That Herr Professor!”
he exclaimed. “He’s just so mean and unreasonable. All I did was to ask
Sigurd, just behind me, how far we were to study. And I had to stand up
in front of the whole room for an hour.” He flushed as he thought of it.

“Perhaps he thought you would have known how far to study if you had been
paying attention,” said Mother, shaking her head, though she felt sorry
for Arne.

“Well, I was thinking of something more important than English grammar.”
In spite of himself, Arne’s face lighted a little. For right in the midst
of class, he had suddenly thought of a delightful plan—a surprise for
everyone for Christmas. Mother was exactly right, though he didn’t like
to admit it. He had been thinking out details of his project instead of
paying attention.

“How do you get along with Herr Professor, Bergel?” asked Besta.

“Oh, of course she gets along fine!” exploded Arne. “She always has her
lessons, and she behaves like a little lady.” The mincing tone he assumed
almost made Mother and Besta smile, though they realized very well that
this was no laughing matter. “Herr Professor likes Bergel, but he sure
doesn’t like me. I might just as well stop trying to please him.”

“Oh, don’t do that, Arne,” urged Bergel. “You’ll get used to him. And
he does know a lot.” She wished from the bottom of her heart that Herr
Professor would say “well done” to Arne once in a while. He did do well
in his history and arithmetic.

“Well, have some _lefse_ and some _ost_ and try harder tomorrow,” said
his mother sensibly. “You’ll get along all right if you pay attention and
study.”

Arne took the _lefse_, but it didn’t taste as good as usual. It didn’t
seem to him he could ever learn to get along with Herr Professor
Engstrand. It certainly looked as if he were headed for trouble. And with
Christmas coming, too.

But he did make an effort, and school went better for some time.

Bergel mentioned it with pleasure as they walked home one afternoon.
“You’re really doing fine in school, Arne,” she said. “You haven’t been
in a bit of trouble lately. Herr Professor hasn’t even had to look your
way. I bet you could be right up at the head of the class if you’d try.”

“There are so many things I like to do better than to have my nose in a
book,” said Arne carelessly. “I like to work out in the workshop for one
thing. Right now,” he added, his face brightening, “I’m working on—” Then
he broke off abruptly and laughed. “Can’t tell you what—it’s a surprise.”

“Oh, go on, tell me,” coaxed Bergel, but Arne only shook his head
mysteriously.

“You’ll see,” was all he would say. “I’d better be getting home to get
at it. There’s a lot left to do if I’m going to have it ready in time.”

From early November, Arne had been spending every moment he could spare
in the little workshop out in back. He was making a number of small
ships, some with tiny sails, some with little oars, sawing and cutting
and gluing and painting with great care. They would be hung all over the
tree—red and green and yellow and blue.

There was to be at least one special one for each member of the family—a
fishing boat for Father, the tiniest sailboat for Margret, a red rowboat
for Besta, and a blue one for Mother. There should be one for each of the
cousins, too, and Uncle Jens and Aunt Tina. And he wanted to make several
for Gustav.

No one else in Nordheim or probably anywhere else would have a tree
trimmed like that. It would be a surprise for everyone. Arne almost
chuckled aloud whenever he thought of it.

His face was bright today as he ran into the kitchen. There were Mother
and Besta, having their afternoon cup of coffee. The kitchen was filled
with the good smell of baking. _Rosettes_ were spread out on the
table—delicate, beautifully-shaped cakes fried in deep fat. There were
also crisp star-shaped cinnamon cookies.

He pulled off his cap and asked eagerly, “Any broken pieces for me?” He
knew all the well-shaped cakes and cookies would be put away carefully
for Christmas.

“Besta broke a few for you,” said his mother, with a twinkle. “And before
you go out to that workshop, get me some soap from the storeroom. I am
going to take down the curtains and put them to soak.”

For weeks, now, the house had been in a bustle and flurry of Christmas
cleaning. Every spot was shining—floors and furniture, brass and copper.
The house fairly seemed to twinkle.

He couldn’t see why they had to take down the lace-trimmed window
curtains to be washed and stiffly starched. Those curtains looked white
as snow to him. But when he said that to Mother, she laughed out loud.
“Not have clean curtains for Christmas!” she exclaimed. “What a boy you
are, Arne! If your mother did such a thing, _Julenissen_ would be so
horrified he would run right away from our house.”

Arne laughed, too. You certainly wouldn’t want to scare away
_Julenissen_, the little elf with the pointed red cap and little red
suit. He was supposed to live in the attic and bring special good luck
at Christmas time, particularly if one always remembered to set out his
bowl of milk and give him his Christmas rice porridge. Arne had never
actually seen _Julenissen_, but he knew someone in the family always saw
to that milk and the porridge.

“_Julenissen_ hates dirt,” said Besta.

“I guess he’ll never get scared away from our house, then,” said Arne.
“And I should think he’d like the Christmas baking even better than the
cleaning.”

“If he doesn’t, I know somebody else who does,” chuckled his mother.

Arne knew there would be stacks of _flatbrod_, hard and crisp and round,
each piece larger than a plate. Besta baked these right on top of her
well-scrubbed cookstove. There would be heart-shaped waffles, and _lefse_
and _bakkelse_ and _rosettes_ and all kinds of good coffeecakes. His
mouth watered at the thought. If a boy hung around the kitchen at the
right times, he was sure to come in for a good many samples, especially
broken bits.

He knew there would also be a final scouring of the house just before
Christmas, that the windows and the copper flowerpots on the window sills
would be gleaming. The geraniums and begonias would be coaxed into bloom
for Christmas.

And of course the womenfolk would be busy planning and preparing food to
last through the Christmas season, for no one wanted to do much work
during the two weeks of the holidays. And there would be a great deal of
company.

Father would see to it that they had all the best kinds of fish—the
smoked and pickled herring. And the _lutfisk_—which he had so disliked to
bale in the summer—would be a favorite part of the Christmas feasting.
There would be cheeses, too, of many kinds, and pickled pigs’ feet and
headcheese, roasted meats and sausages. Mother always set out a good
_koltbord_—a table laden with all these good things and many others;
people could help themselves to suit their tastes.

Arne thought of all this as he fortified himself with a substantial
snack. Then he went out to the workshop. He had almost enough little
ships now, ready for sandpapering and painting. His worries about school
were forgotten, and the time flew as he worked, his lips puckered in a
low, contented whistle.

Suddenly he straightened with a start. It certainly couldn’t be supper
time yet. But Margret was coming down the path calling him.

“Don’t come in! Don’t come in!” he shouted, throwing an old blanket over
his work. Then he ran out and closed the door behind him.

“I wouldn’t come in, Arne. You know that,” she said. Her voice sounded
muffled and unnatural. In the light which streamed from the kitchen
window, he could see that her face looked as if she were trying not to
cry.

“What is it? What is it, Margret?” he asked anxiously. “Is something
wrong?”

“We heard something over the radio,” said Margret; and now, in spite of
her efforts, her voice broke into a sob. “Oh, Arne, there are storms at
sea—bad ones—sleet storms and ice storms right where the _Stjerne_ must
be now!”

Arne’s heart seemed to turn right over. He knew very well the danger his
brother was in. All his life he had heard of those winter storms at sea.
He wished with all his might that Gustav’s ship was safe right here in
Nordheim harbor.




[Illustration]

5


A very quiet family gathered around the supper table that evening. Even
the thought of his little ships didn’t bring Arne any cheer. Indeed, he
could hardly bear even to think of ships. Mother tried to talk as usual,
and so did Father, but no one’s heart was in it.

Arne could not settle down to anything. He wanted to ask questions, but
knew there could be no comforting answers. At last, without being told,
he wandered off to bed.

It was hard for him to keep his mind on schoolwork the next morning. He
rushed home at the midday recess, bolted his meal, got his field glasses,
and went up to the cliff as fast as he could get there. Gustav’s ship
should be coming in soon, if it hadn’t run into trouble. You never knew
for sure when a freighter would be in. Father said it was always best to
allow a little extra time even in good weather. But Arne had been hoping
it might come in a little ahead of time. Perhaps he’d even catch sight
of it today. Then there would certainly be rejoicing!

There was no sign of the ship as he looked out over the stormy waters,
but he lingered so long on the cliff that he barely got into the
schoolroom in time. Herr Engstrand looked at him severely, and though he
said nothing, Arne realized he had better not cut it so close again.

He couldn’t keep away from the cliff at noon. But each day he stood
there, looking, only a short time and was careful to get to school before
the bell rang.

[Illustration]

At home, Mother was trying her best to keep everything normal, but she
looked more and more anxious as the news of storms continued. Even
Father, accustomed as he was to ships and storms at sea, looked anxious
as he listened to the reports over the radio.

Christmas preparations went on, but there wasn’t much laughing or singing
over them now.

“Why don’t we hear something?” Arne asked his father in desperation.
“Couldn’t they let someone know if they’re in trouble? Couldn’t help go
to them?”

“We hear the names of some of the ships in trouble. But no word comes
of the _Stjerne_,” his father said, and paused. “I hope it is just that
their radio has gone bad. Yes, that must be it.” He spoke as if he wanted
to reassure himself as much as Arne.

That day the bell had rung before Arne slid into his seat at school. He
got a sharp reprimand from the teacher, but for once he didn’t care. He
could only think of Gustav, out there on the stormy sea.

But Bergel _did_ care. She knew Christmas plans were afoot in school, and
she could not bear to have him get into trouble now. The next noon Bergel
was watching for her cousin, and when she saw him start toward the cliff,
she seized her sled and ran after him.

“Arne! Arne!” she called over and over as she neared the cliff, but the
wind was strong, and he did not hear her. She hurried on, faster than
ever, looking anxious but determined. If they didn’t look out, they’d
both be late for school.

Yes, there he was, high up on the very peak of the cliff, looking out to
sea through his field glasses. She called and shouted, waving her arm in
a frantic signal. This time he heard, put his glasses away, and started
down.

“Look here, Bergel, you didn’t need to come—” he began, slightly annoyed.

“I know,” interrupted Bergel. “But today I think Herr Professor is going
to announce the trip up the mountain for Christmas greens. You don’t want
to be late and maybe have to stay home from that. I think my sled will
get us there on time.”

“So!” said Arne. Bergel was a pretty good kid. “Hop on, then. We’ll beat
that school bell. We’ll take the short cut, shall we? That’ll get us
there all right.”

“Well,” said Bergel, hesitating a little. “It’s dangerous, but—”

“Not with your cousin Arne as navigator! Come on!”

Arne was daring, Bergel knew that, but he was skillful, too. And she
certainly didn’t want to be late today. Herr Professor might punish
latecomers by refusing to let them go on that expedition up the mountain
for the Christmas greens. She got on the sled and shut her eyes tight as
they went flying down the steep hill toward the schoolgrounds. She was a
little frightened, it is true, but almost too excited to realize it. If
they avoided that big rock now, they’d be all right.

[Illustration]

Arne’s face was grim as they whizzed downward. This was a dangerous hill.
He had to give all his attention to steering and braking. Bergel had
risked her own good record and the chance of going up the mountain in
order to warn him. He just had to get her back safely and on time.

It was a triumphant moment when the breathless ride was accomplished
safely, and the cousins jumped off the sled. Then they made a dash across
the schoolground.

Arne’s thoughts were racing as fast as his feet. Where was that ship,
anyway? It was really overdue now, several days. Maybe something had
happened to Captain Olsen. Maybe Gustav had to bring in the ship. What
if he had had to take command and had failed to bring it safely to port?
Arne couldn’t bear to think of such a thing.

He looked so anxious that Bergel, glancing at him as they pulled off
their coats, said softly, “Don’t forget—it’s the Christmas _Star_ we’re
waiting for. And remember, that’s always come in safe and sure.”

Arne nodded and hurried across the schoolroom and slid into his seat just
as the bell rang. His spirits, never down for very long, rose a little.
He and Bergel had made port safely, anyhow, and in time, too.

But Herr Professor Engstrand looked at him gravely for a moment and said,
“Tardiness is a fault I do not wish my pupils to develop. Arne Dalen,
you have come in once this week just after the bell rang, and you have
repeatedly got in barely on time. I shall have to take strong measures if
you are tardy again.”

Arne’s face flushed, and he looked down in embarrassment. If he could
only explain! But you couldn’t explain things to Herr Professor.

He was heartily glad when the teacher went on in an entirely different
tone, “I have a pleasant announcement to make. On Friday afternoon,
all you older pupils are to go up the mountain for greens to decorate
the schoolhouse for the Christmas program. All bring flashlights and
sandwiches. We shall make a campfire and have a picnic. Froken Utvig
promises we shall practice some of our Christmas songs there.”

There was a stir of delight throughout the room. The trip up the mountain
for Christmas greens was a favorite yearly event. Getting the greens and
decorating was even more fun than the Christmas program itself. This
was the first time Arne and Bergel’s class had been included in the
expedition. Arne’s eyes glowed as he thought of the picnic supper, the
campfire up there on the dark mountain, the singing that would float all
up and down the mountainside.

But some of the girls looked a little perturbed, and the teacher almost
smiled as he said, “We shall not stand out there in the snow eating our
supper. Froken Utvig says we can find shelter in her father’s saeter
cabin.”

The Utvig saeter! Oh, that would be something, Arne thought. Everyone
said the Utvig cabin was the finest on the mountain. Arne had never been
there, and he almost forgot about the _Stjerne_ in his excitement. It was
wonderful fun to go up to a saeter in summer, but in winter it would be
a real adventure. He resolved to be on time for the rest of the week. He
certainly could not run the chance of being left out of that trip up the
mountain.

Arne could hardly keep his feet from taking the familiar cliff path the
next noon. If only there were just a little daylight after school. Then
he’d hurry as fast as he could up the cliff, get out those field glasses,
and stand looking as long as he liked. But it would be dark by that time.
And tomorrow was the day of the trip up the mountain. No, he couldn’t run
the risk of being late.

With a mighty effort he managed to trudge straight to school. He even
got there a little early. He was too anxious and miserable to stay out
playing, so he earned the pleased surprise of Herr Professor by going
straight into the schoolroom, opening his book, and settling down. But
his thoughts were not on his Norwegian history, though that was a subject
he really liked, full as it was of stirring events. His thoughts were
with the freighter _Stjerne_, in peril out there on the stormy sea.

Arne hurried home right after school, hoping better news had come in. His
mother was in a perfect fury of baking. She was making _lefse_, and he
usually liked to watch her doing that. But today he didn’t care much, for
one look at her face told him that the news was not good.

She whisked the kettle of potatoes off the fire, mashed them violently,
mixed in flour and salt and cream. Then she rolled out the dough into
large, thin, round cakes, and Besta baked them on the top of the
cookstove.

Both of them nodded a greeting to him, but no one seemed to feel like
talking. Presently Besta buttered a piece of warm _lefse_, spread it with
brown sugar, rolled it, and handed it to Arne. Even now he did not forget
the polite Norwegian “_Mange tak_,” “Many thanks.”

He took his _lefse_ and wandered off to the workshop, but there was a
lump in his throat as he drew the covering back and looked at his little
ships. It didn’t seem to him he could work at them today, and he started
to cover them again. Then he stopped and said fiercely right out loud,
“Look here, Arne Dalen! Gustav wouldn’t do that. He’s a great one to
stick at something until he gets it done.”

Somehow that idea comforted Arne. Wherever Gustav was, even if he was in
serious difficulties, he’d be doing something to try to put things right.
He remembered how quick and sure his brother had been last summer on the
_Laks_ when the rocks had fallen. And Gustav had weathered bad storms
before this. Captain Olsen, too. They were two good men, Father said.
And they had a good crew of Norwegian sailors. Arne picked up one of the
little ships and began a careful job of sandpapering. Even after supper
he came out and found comfort in working. When Gustav came home, the
surprise would be ready.

He lingered in the kitchen next morning for a few minutes after the
others had gone about their various duties. He wanted to talk to Mother
about preparations for that trip up the mountain. But more than that, he
wanted very much to say something encouraging to her.

It was hard to know just what to say. The Dalens came from a long line
of seafaring people, and no one talked much about it when there were
storms and ships were overdue. But Arne couldn’t bear that bleak look on
his mother’s face. It was not at all like her. She was a cheerful, busy
person, almost as full of lively plans and ideas as Arne himself.

It didn’t take long to settle about the lunch. Mother promised to make
him some extra nice _smörbröd_, or sandwiches. At a picnic like that, all
the sandwiches would be spread out and shared, and hers must do both Arne
and herself credit. She promised to decorate them in all kinds of fancy
patterns. She would put in some of the _bakkelse_, too, and other cakes.

Arne was well pleased with this, but he didn’t quite know how to go on to
the next subject. Then Bergel’s words of comfort came back to him. They
had made him feel better. Maybe Mother would like them too. He cleared
his throat and said gruffly, “Gustav’s ship is the Christmas _Star_, you
know, Mother. It’ll come in safe, I’m just sure it will.”

Tears sprang into his mother’s eyes and brimmed over, and Arne wished
earnestly that he had not spoken at all. He didn’t know whether to keep
still now or to try again, so he just put his arm around her and gave her
a quick, fervent hug.

She swallowed hard, shook herself, and wiped her eyes fiercely. “There
now, Arne,” she said, hustling the dishes off the table. “Of course it
will come in.” And somehow she managed to smile. “Run to school now, boy.
Don’t be late.”

When Arne came home at noon, a lunch was ready packed for him to take up
the mountain. He got out his flashlight and skis and put all the things
together. His mother tried to talk cheerfully of all these preparations
as they ate their lunch, but her sentences trailed off in a way not at
all like her.

The boy’s heart was heavy as he left the house. He started for school,
then stopped and swung swiftly around. He’d go like lightning up the
cliff, and maybe he’d see Gustav’s ship. Then he’d ski down the slope and
tell his mother. He’d have time. He was starting back to school earlier
than usual.

He hesitated just an instant. This was no day to be late. Then he set off
at full speed toward the cliff.

He caught his breath in exultation as his glasses swept the angry,
heaving waves. It was beginning to snow, but in spite of that he could
see there was a ship far out—a ship that could be the _Stjerne_! But it
was much too far away for him to make sure. And yet he couldn’t bear to
leave in uncertainty. The minutes flew by as he stood there, too intent
on watching to think of anything else.

Suddenly a bell far down below brought him up with a jerk. That was the
school bell. First bell, only. If he skied like mad, he might make it.

But though he felt as if he were actually flying down the slope, the last
bell sounded loud and clear through the wintry air before he even reached
the schoolground.

With all his heart Arne wished he didn’t have to go into that schoolroom.
But he knew he did. He paused for an instant at the door. Then he braced
himself and entered, his head erect but his cheeks crimson as he walked
quickly and quietly to his desk.

There was an air of excitement in the room, and Herr Engstrand had
evidently been talking, for no books were open. Now he paused and waited
till Arne took his seat.

“I am very sorry you chose to be late this noon, Arne,” he said, and
though his tone was stern, it did sound a little regretful, too. “I
dislike very much to keep you in today of all days, but you have been
warned and spoken to more than once. Get out your English grammar and do
the exercises on pages 63 and 64. Have them on my desk before you leave
the schoolroom. And now the rest of you may get your wraps and skis.
As I was beginning to explain, it has been decided on account of the
threatening snow that we start at once and get back before too late. The
afternoon session is excused.”

Arne sent a stunned glance at Bergel. They were actually going to have a
half-holiday and go up the mountain. And they were leaving him out of
it. Her face, sorrowful and reproachful, didn’t make him feel any better.
In the flurry of leaving, she seemed very busy with one or two papers.
Then she gave him a long look and rose to go with the others.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

6


As the other children trooped out, Arne pretended to be deep in his work.
Let them go then, and have a good time. What did they care about his
troubles? They didn’t have a brother out on the stormy sea and a worried
family at home. Let them go, and see if he cared! But he did care,
tremendously. There was a lump in his throat he couldn’t swallow.

Bergel passed his seat and touched his shoulder gently. He shrugged off
her hand, but she slid it down toward his and left a piece of paper
there. He acted as if he didn’t see it, for he was hurt and disappointed
and angry. Probably just a note saying he should have been more careful.
He wouldn’t even look at it.

The shouting and laughter died away at last, and Arne looked gloomily
down at his books. He felt more like crying than doing exercises. But of
course he was too big to do a thing like that. If only Herr Engstrand
had given him anything but English grammar to do! He must know how Arne
disliked that. Arithmetic, now—he could have got that done in a hurry and
maybe he could have caught up with the others. But English grammar! And
two long exercises! He’d never get those done.

Suddenly he remembered another trip up the mountain—the summer trip,
when he had thought he would have to stay home to bale _lutfisk_. With
Gustav’s help, he had got that job done in time to go with the others.
No one was here to help him now, but perhaps he could get this job done
himself and follow the others. His usual hopefulness began to come to his
rescue. Herr Engstrand hadn’t said he couldn’t come on the trip. He had
only said he must finish the exercises before he left.

Arne turned to his books in earnest, now. He knew how to do that first
sentence, anyway. Maybe this wasn’t such a hard exercise, after all. He
was half through it, his spirits rising as he worked, when his hopes fell
again. He didn’t know the way to the Utvig saeter, and he was well enough
acquainted with mountains to realize that a snowy day in December was no
time to strike out on unfamiliar ways.

He gave a deep sigh and turned back to his work. No use to try to get it
done fast. It didn’t matter when he finished. But he went doggedly on,
and a sudden thought came to him. Bergel had certainly looked as if she
wanted to tell him something. He picked up the note, his face brightening
as he read: “Utvig saeter is above ours. Go up the Ahlness trail, then
take the left fork where there are three saeter cabins.” She had even
scrawled a little map. With fresh energy, Arne bent to his lesson.

The schoolroom clock had ticked an hour away when the boy laid his
exercises on Herr Professor’s desk. He put on his skis, settled his
knapsack on his back, and set off on his trip up the mountain through the
falling snow.

The boy felt confident and light-hearted as he hastened up toward his
uncle’s saeter. Though the familiar landmarks looked different in their
winter dress, he could recognize them without difficulty. He knew he was
making better time alone than the others could in a large company. As he
sped along he began to hope he might overtake them, or at least get there
in time to help bring in the greens.

The snow, which fell heavily at first, began to slacken a little. He
managed to go along at a steady pace, but it seemed a long time before he
came out where Uncle Jens’s cabin faced the fjord. The little log house
looked forlorn with all its windows boarded over for winter, and Arne
was anxious to hurry on. Far out at sea he could detect the faint light
of a ship. He wondered if it could possibly be the _Stjerne_.

The snow had stopped now, and strong winds blew in steadily from the
sea. Dusk had closed in, and Arne shivered as he stood there, not sure
how to go ahead. “Take the Ahlness trail,” Bergel’s note had said. There
was more than one path zigzagging about up here, he knew, but as far as
he could remember, there was only one good trail that led way up the
mountain. That must be the one. Those folks up there ahead must have left
plenty of tracks. But he had difficulty in finding them because of the
drifting snow. At last, however, with the aid of his flashlight, he did
manage to find some traces.

If only Bergel had said how far it was! It seemed to Arne that the way
was much longer than he had expected it to be. Though he got out his
flashlight often, he didn’t see anything of three saeter cabins in a
cluster, to say nothing of a fork in the trail. The way was very steep in
places, and he did wish those tracks were plainer.

And now he had come to a place where the snow was so drifted he couldn’t
see any tracks at all. He was uncertain what to do, which way to take,
and almost wished he had never started on this difficult journey alone.

Then he looked up toward the mountain top, and just above it, where
the wind had ripped the clouds apart, he saw one bright star shining.
Christmas star again, thought Arne, and felt a little better. He pressed
on and at last came to the three small houses. Now for the fork in the
trail!

But he could not make out any tracks in the drifted snow, and there
didn’t seem to be any real trail, though there was a break in the bushes
here. He’d start that way. But he hadn’t gone far when he was brought
up short by a great boulder in the way. This certainly could not be the
trail. He went back and started again, but this time a thicket of bushes
blocked the path. Perhaps, after all, he had come the wrong way. Perhaps
those three cabins were not the ones Bergel had meant. His heart was
thumping. What if he was lost in these mountains?

He stood there straining his eyes in the gray darkness. If only he could
catch some gleam of the campfire! He could see no sign of light on the
dark mountain, but as he stood, trying to think of something he could do,
a familiar sound came down to him—a long-drawn blast that could only
come from a saeter horn. Someone was certainly sending him a signal, and
he felt sure it was Bergel.

Arne stood still, trying to determine just where that call had come from.
As he waited, it came again, over and over. The star would be a good
guide now, for the horn’s blast had come from exactly that direction.
Now, a little to the left, he found a way through the thicket; with the
help of the horn and of his bright star, he forged steadily ahead.

At last, to his great relief and delight, he caught sight of a glimmer of
light above him. Soon he began to hear voices in the distance—faint at
first, then louder. Now he could hear calls and shouts and laughter and
bits of song, and above all, the sound of the horn.

In a few moments the full brightness of the campfire burst upon him. He
saw people scurrying about; but one small, valiant figure caught his eye
and warmed his heart. It was Bergel, standing in the firelight, the long
saeter horn at her lips. She blew a blast that Arne felt must be heard
clear down at Nordheim, and he almost felt like giving her a hug. Instead
he skied silently to her side and stood there grinning. “Calling someone,
Bergel?” he asked.

“Arne!” she cried, and threw both arms around him. “Oh, I was so worried!
I knew you’d try to come, and then it snowed so hard for a while, and
drifted so, and you didn’t know the way. How did you ever manage to find
it?” Her tone showed plainly that she considered that quite a feat.

[Illustration]

“Well, you helped,” said Arne. He slipped away from her embrace, but his
voice was gentle. “And then I guess the Christmas star helped, too.” He
nodded to where the bright star shone among drifting clouds.

“You see! Isn’t that a good sign?” said Bergel triumphantly. “And now
you’re in time to help with the greens, Arne. The boys have gone up there
just a little ways. Got your hunting knife?”

“Do you suppose I’d come up here without it?” asked Arne. But he smiled
at her, and she smiled back before she turned to help with the supper.

Everyone was glad to see Arne, though nobody said much about it. He
pulled his silver-handled hunting knife from the sheath at his belt and
was soon in the thick of the work, helping cut branches and put them in
bundles.

In spite of himself, his respect for Herr Professor Engstrand increased
as he watched him directing and helping. The teacher had obtained
permission to take what they needed, and seemed to know exactly how to go
about getting it. When he climbed easily up a big tree, Arne could hardly
believe his eyes. Was this the same dignified man who didn’t seem to be
interested in anything but books and lessons and keeping order?

Eager to do his part now that he was here, Arne went right up to a
treetop to get some specially fine branches with clusters of cones. When
he came nimbly down, he saw, with some dismay, that the other boys had
gone on and that only Herr Engstrand was at hand. He was probably in for
a good scolding now, but surely Herr Professor wouldn’t send him home
when he had toiled so hard to get up here alone.

Arne started to run after the other boys, but the teacher took two or
three long strides, laid a hand on his shoulder, and turned him around.
“Just a minute, my boy,” he said. “I have something to say to you.”

Arne’s heart seemed to go right down into his boots. “Yes, sir,” he
managed to mumble. “Maybe I shouldn’t have come, but I—well, I did
my exercises first, and I didn’t think you said—” His voice trailed
miserably off.

“I didn’t say you shouldn’t come,” said the teacher in a matter-of-fact
tone. “In fact, I hoped you would, though I didn’t feel I could encourage
you to do so, in view of the weather and the distance. Of course I know
it takes more than a snowstorm to keep a Norwegian boy off a mountain. In
fact, people say mountains and snow are all a Norwegian needs for fun.
But I didn’t think you knew the way here.”

“I didn’t really, but—” Arne began and then stopped short, uncertain and
embarrassed. He certainly could not tell Herr Professor about Bergel’s
note. How could he explain?

Herr Engstrand was going on, “But your cousin told me—” He stopped so
long that Arne looked up and, to his great surprise, saw that his teacher
was smiling a little. “She is a conscientious little girl, as well as a
good pupil, and I think she felt she might not have done right. And then,
too, I think she began to get worried about you. So she told me about
leaving you the note. And I’ll admit we were all a little anxious when
you did not arrive.”

“Those grammar exercises,” said Arne, with a gusty sigh. “They took quite
a while. But who thought of the saeter horn? That was a life-saver.”

“It was Bergel who thought of that, and Froken Utvig found it for her.
Bergel told me something else, Arne. She told me why you had been late
those times. I should have been glad if you had told me yourself.”

“You would?” exclaimed Arne in astonishment, and added, with complete
honesty, “I never thought of that.”

Herr Engstrand dropped his hand from Arne’s shoulder. “I see,” was all he
said, but his voice made Arne think of the way he himself sometimes felt
when he tried very hard to do something and did not succeed.

That tone made Arne want to mend matters, and he hurried on, “I didn’t
know you’d be interested, but I guess you are. So I want to tell you why
I was late this noon. Bergel didn’t know about that. I saw a ship way out
in the storm and I thought it might be Gustav’s. And from Uncle Jens’s
saeter I could still see the lights of a ship a good ways out.”

“I see,” Herr Engstrand said again. But this time his tone was quite
different. “A ship would have a hard time making port in a sea like this.”

Arne looked up at him in alarm. “Oh, Herr Professor Engstrand!” he
exclaimed. “Do you suppose—what if Gustav’s ship got nearly home only to
be dashed to pieces on the rocks?”

“Of course the chances are it was not the _Stjerne_ at all,” said Herr
Engstrand. His voice was thoughtful.

“Oh, I wish that wind would go down,” said Arne fervently. “There aren’t
even any stars out, now.”

“Well, Arne, these Norwegian skippers know our coast pretty well, don’t
forget that. And from what I hear, Captain Olsen is a fine navigator.
Come, Bergel is blowing the horn again. That is the signal for supper.”

Arne gathered with the others around the great fire piled high in the
kitchen fireplace. Froken Utvig and the girls had scrubbed a long
table, laid a bright cloth over it, and spread it with gaily-decorated
sandwiches and cakes. Everyone was hungry and ready for the good food and
the singing.

There were Christmas songs first, and folk songs followed. Then everyone
stood to sing the national anthem:

    “_Yes, we love with fond devotion_
      _Norway’s mountain domes,_
    _Rising storm-lashed o’er the ocean_
      _With their thousand homes._”

“‘Storm-lashed’ is right,” thought Arne. But he loved the fine old
anthem, just as the others did, and joined in the singing with all his
heart.

“I think those songs all but lifted the roof,” said Froken Utvig,
smiling. “But now, as it is still snowy and drifting, and the wind is
strong, we had better start home.”

Everyone hurried about—putting out the fire, getting things in order.
Arne was as busy as anyone, but he couldn’t help thinking about the
_Stjerne_. What if she was tossing about out there, very close to the
rocky shore, driven by the wind? What if Gustav should be almost in port,
only to have his ship go down tonight?

His face was troubled as he bent to fasten his skis, but he looked up
quickly as Herr Professor came over to him and said, “Arne, I want you
to help me with some of these greens. Can you carry a load as big as
this, do you think? We’ll fasten it on your back if you can.”

Ordinarily Arne would have been proud of such a request, for the load
was a large one. But tonight he had planned to rush ahead with all speed
and see if it could be possible that his brother’s ship had come in. He
couldn’t make much time with such a load. But he could do nothing but
answer, “Yes, sir, I can.”

“Good boy,” said Herr Engstrand. “Now, Arne, I want you to stay behind
with me just a little. I have one or two things to do.”

“Yes, sir,” said Arne, but his disappointment showed so plainly that Herr
Professor said, “What is it, boy?”

“It’s my brother’s ship, sir,” said Arne, in a low tone. “I thought she
might have come in. I wanted to—”

“Yes, yes, I see. Well, Arne, that’s why I want you to stay behind. An
idea has occurred to me—a way you and I may be able to help your brother.
I have told Froken Utvig to let some of the big boys guide the party.”

“Yes, sir,” said Arne again, but this time he was thoroughly puzzled. How
could he and Herr Engstrand up here on the mountain possibly be of any
help to Gustav out there on the stormy sea?




[Illustration]

7


There was a good deal of laughter as the boys divided the greens and
arranged the loads on their backs. Then away they went, singing and
shouting, the girls insisting on carrying some of the smaller branches
with especially fine cones.

How Arne wished that he could be a member of the merry group! He wanted
to get down to Nordheim fast, and it seemed to him that Herr Engstrand
was taking a good deal of time over things that were not necessary.

But once the others were out of sight, the teacher said, “Now, Arne, full
speed ahead down to your uncle’s saeter. The wind is getting higher. It
feels to me as if it’s going to snow again, and we’ve got work to do, you
and I.”

Arne was more puzzled than ever. What work could they possibly have to do
up here? But Herr Engstrand was skiing down the mountain with a speed
that Arne found hard to follow. When he reached Uncle Jens’s saeter, Herr
Engstrand was already there, playing his flashlight all around the little
clearing.

From the high point near the cliff, the boy could see lights moving out
on the open sea leading to the fjord. “Looks as if a ship’s in trouble
out there,” he said anxiously. “Are we going on down, sir?”

“No, here’s where we stop, Arne. Let us make a big fire, you and I, and
keep it going to give a signal to that ship. They can tell from the
height that this is the cliff, and if I’m not mistaken, they’ll know the
harbor is below here.”

“Oh, that’s the plan!” exclaimed Arne. It was such a good one, and yet so
simple, he wondered why he hadn’t thought of it himself. Neither of them
said much; but they worked fast, and a fire was soon started near the
edge of the cliff.

“Now, Arne,” said Herr Engstrand, “we will pile our boughs on this and
make a big blaze right away while we collect more.”

“So that’s why you wanted me to take such a big load!” said Arne. “And
you took a lot more than I did, even.”

“I wanted to get this thing going right away. There!” He threw his bundle
on the fire. “Pitch yours on, Arne.”

Arne threw his pine boughs on and watched with satisfaction as they burst
into a great blaze.

“Now we must collect plenty of fuel, Arne. I have my small hatchet, of
course. And you have your hunting knife. We must keep this fire burning
high and bright. Then we’ll watch to see what happens out there.”

Arne did a good deal of thinking as he dragged in branches and twigs.
This wasn’t a bit like the Herr Professor who had been so stern and
strict and had seemed interested only in lessons. This was really
smart—like something Gustav himself might have thought of. He’d like
to tell Herr Professor so, but even now he could not quite get up his
courage to do that. But when they had collected a large pile of wood and
were standing by the fire watching those lights out at sea, he did manage
to ask, “Herr Professor, how did you happen to think of doing this?”

“Well, Arne, I was a commando in the war,” Herr Engstrand said quietly.

“A commando!” gasped Arne.

“Yes. We learned to think of all sorts of ways to do things in
emergencies. More than once we guided a vessel safely to port just this
way.”

“A commando! That’s what Gustav wanted to be. But he wasn’t quite old
enough. He says they learned everything, just about.”

“Well, we did learn a lot of things. For one thing, we learned to obey
orders fast and to the letter.” He paused for a moment and went on,
more as if he were thinking aloud than speaking to his companion, “But
schoolboys aren’t commandos, and I don’t suppose you can expect—” He
broke off and looked at Arne with a quizzical expression.

Arne was standing very straight, his eyes eager and alert as he looked
back at Herr Engstrand. “Oh, sir, but I think you can expect us to—” He
stopped as if he had just remembered something. “From now on,” he said
emphatically, “I’m sure you can expect that.”

“I believe I can, Arne,” said Herr Professor.

His voice was serious; but it was friendly, too, and now Arne did not
find it very hard to muster courage to say, “All the boys would like to
know about your being a commando. The girls, too. Couldn’t you—wouldn’t
you tell them about that? We’d all be interested.”

“You would?” In the firelight, Arne could see that his teacher was
smiling a little. “I had an idea school was for lessons. But maybe there
are several kinds of lessons. And now, Arne, up and at ’em. More wood!”

Arne rushed off, but this time he had new hope. He was working with
a commando! And the commandos had got out of all sorts of dangerous
situations. Herr Engstrand seemed confident that Captain Olsen and Gustav
would do the same thing and bring the _Stjerne_ in safely.

Each time they returned to the fire, they stopped to watch the ship
struggling out there against the wind. Then they dashed back to work
harder than ever. It was not easy to collect enough fuel in the snow, but
both of them worked with a will.

At last Arne said hopefully, “I think she’s making progress out there,
sir.”

“Yes, looks as if she’s making for the channel. Come on, Arne. We have to
keep the fire high and bright now.”

When they returned the next time, Arne gave a great shout. “She’s coming
in! She’s coming in! Oh, if she can just hold her course, she’ll be safe.”

“Yes, she’s making headway all right. Looks as if it could be the
_Stjerne_, Arne.”

Arne fairly flew off to get more wood, his heart beating so hard he
couldn’t even talk. This time, when they came back to the fire, there
was no doubt about it. “She’s past the barrier now, and moving into the
channel,” said Herr Professor.

“Oh, Herr Professor!” Arne shouted, and in his exuberance he snatched
off his cap and threw it so high it almost came down in the fire. “It’s
Gustav’s ship! It’s Gustav’s ship, safe and sound. I know it is.”

“How would you like to start down, Arne, and be there on the dock to
greet your brother? Everybody will be there, and I know you’d like to be
on hand with the others.”

“Oh, boy!” cried Arne joyfully. “Oh, boy!” But then he looked quickly at
the teacher. “But we couldn’t leave the fire, could we? They still need
it, don’t they? This is about as important a time as any, isn’t it?”

“Yes, we have to keep it going till we’re sure they’re safe. But I could
manage to tend it alone now, if you’d like to get started down.”

Arne hesitated just a moment. He wanted dreadfully to be right down there
on the dock when the _Stjerne_ came in. But then he shook his head. “No,”
he said. “One commando would never walk out on another. I’m going to help
keep this fire going.”

“Good boy, Arne. I think your brother would like that,” said Herr
Professor. There was an expression of such approval and pleasure on his
face that Arne’s cheeks flamed and he looked away, feeling very happy.
“We’ll both work hard, then; and we’re pretty fast on our skis. We’ll go
down a lot faster than we came up. The ship won’t beat us in by much.”

In the very midst of gathering his next load of wood, Arne stopped and
laughed right out loud. “I’ve thought of something, Herr Professor!”
he cried. “I’ve thought of how I can get down there fast—just like a
commando. We can keep the fire going as long as necessary, and I can
still beat the ship to the dock.”

“And how are you going to do that, Arne?”

“I can go right down the wires Uncle Jens arranged to let the milk and
stuff down the cliff. Gustav did that last summer when he saw Torger
Blessom’s boat overturned.” He hesitated a moment. “I was wishing then I
had the nerve to do it.”

“And now you have!” said Herr Professor with a nod. “You’ll need rope for
that, Arne.”

“Yes, there’s one up here. I know where it’s kept. And can’t we sort of
bundle me up in greens, a little?”

“Yes, and you’ll need something more than mittens to put on your hands
to keep them from getting cut.”

“Yes, Gustav wound a lot of cloth around his, I remember that. And I know
where Aunt Tina keeps some rags we can use. One good thing—there’s plenty
of snow at the foot of the cliff; so I should make a good landing.”

Herr Engstrand laughed. “Arne, I see plainly you’ve got the makings of
a first-rate commando!” he said. “You’ve got good Viking blood. Your
brother is going to be proud of you. We’ll send you right down those
wires to welcome him, all right.”

“She’s coming in! She’s coming in, Herr Professor! Here she comes, the
Christmas _Star_! She doesn’t look very big, way down there!”

“No, we usually think of a Christmas star high above us in the heavens,
instead of far below us on the water,” said Herr Professor.

“I guess a Christmas star isn’t out of place anywhere, is it?” said Arne.
“The _Stjerne_ is sure going to look good to us in that harbor. We won’t
need to bring in many more loads now, will we?”

The fire on the cliff blazed high, and the two worked fast to keep it
replenished. The ship came closer and closer to port; and at last Herr
Engstrand said, “They don’t need our fire any more, Arne. The lights of
the town will be enough. Now we’ll get you ready, and down you go!”

Both of them worked fast to get Arne ready for his journey down. Herr
Engstrand made sure the rope was safe and strong before he tied the loop
in which Arne was to sit. Soon the boy was bundled up in greens, his
hands well wrapped. Herr Professor settled him securely in the rope sling.

“I’ll hold as tight as I can at first,” he said. “But once you get going,
you’ll have a fast ride. Ready now? Here you go, down the wires to meet
the Christmas _Star_!”

“Ready!” Arne managed to say, but his mouth was dry, and when he tried to
swallow it seemed to him his heart was right up in his throat. The lights
of Nordheim looked far, far below him.

Then Herr Professor gave him a little push and started him downward. Arne
knew his teacher was holding the rope as firmly as possible, but the
sling went in jerks along the wires. Probably they were rusty. What if
they should break? The rope, too! It had been used all summer long. It
might be a little frayed. What if it should break, with all this jerking?

Then he remembered how Gustav had thrown his weight first one way and
then another to steady his progress. He tried to do the same now, and he
began to go faster and more smoothly.

Once fairly started, it was a swift, breathless ride Arne had down those
wires. Fast as he was used to going on skis and sleds, he had never had
such a ride as this. The blood pounded in his ears as he rushed through
the air toward the foot of the cliff.

He hoped fervently that there would be a good, deep snowdrift where he
landed. There was! In another instant, Arne, encased in greens, his hands
bound with rags, plumped right into the midst of a great drift.

He heard the deep, throaty blast of the ship and a loud cheer from the
people who had gathered on the dock. He struggled and pushed, trying to
get free. After all he had gone through, here he was stuck in a drift.
And the _Stjerne_ was almost in port.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

8


Arne managed to struggle out of the snowdrift at last, and to get free of
the rope, but even then he could not rid himself of the greens nor the
rags so firmly tied about his hands. But he was determined not to miss
meeting that ship, even if he had to roll all the way to the dock. Once
he got there, someone would help him out of his strange trimmings. What
if he did look like a combination snowdrift and walking Christmas tree?

It was Bergel who saw him coming. She gave a scream of alarm and then
burst into laughter as Arne shouted, “It’s just me—Arne!”

She flew to his rescue, and Mother hurried to him too, and Margret and
Besta. He soon stood free of his greens and rags, explaining a little in
quick, eager sentences. But there was scant time for explanation, for the
_Stjerne’s_ bells were ringing, her whistle was blowing, and she was in
port.

All of them rushed to be right there when Gustav came down the gangplank.
Then there was excitement and joy, talk and laughter, and even happy
tears.

“I want to hear everything, Gustav—what happened—tell us all about it!”
cried Arne, rushing at his brother.

“Wait now,” said his mother. “Gustav, we have such a supper for you!
Uncle Jens and all are coming over. It is enough now we have you safe
home. We will hear the story at supper.”

[Illustration]

What a story Gustav had to tell—a story of storms, of a ship for a time
fairly sheeted with ice. He told of the injury to the engines, of the
radio going bad, of a struggling trip home, then another storm when they
were almost there.

“It was a big fire on the cliff that helped us—perhaps really saved us,”
he said. “We were trying to stay away from shore, the winds out there
were so violent. Then this fire guided us in. I wonder who made that
fire.”

“Arne did that,” said Bergel proudly. “Arne and Herr Professor Engstrand.”

“Of course it was his idea,” Arne said modestly. And the little company
listened in wonder as he explained how Herr Engstrand had thought of the
plan and they had worked together to carry it out.

“That was smart, Arne, really smart!” said Gustav. “I want to know this
Herr Professor of yours. He must have had confidence in you, too, to have
you help like that. It was a big job, and a good one.”

Arne hadn’t thought of that idea, and it pleased him enormously.

“Do you like our Herr Engstrand better now, Arne?” asked Bergel.

“Like him!” cried Arne. “A commando like that—someone who knew just
the right thing to do? Of course I like him. Not many boys have such a
teacher!”

His mother smiled at him. She had a feeling there wouldn’t be much
trouble about school from now on. “I think we must ask Herr Professor
here to share our Christmas Eve,” she said. “I believe he is far from his
home.”

Christmas preparations were redoubled now. There were only a few days
left, and work had lagged a little of late. Mother and Besta and Margret
cleaned and baked and cooked from morning till night.

Arne was very thankful he had stuck at his shipmaking in spite of
everything. Those ships would all be ready in time. He had only a little
more painting to finish. His big problem now was how to get them on the
Christmas tree without having everyone find out about them.

Mother and Besta and Margret always trimmed the tree. It stood in the
best room; the door was shut, and Mother kept her eye on it. Arne
certainly didn’t see how he was going to get those ships hung.

This year Uncle Jens’s family was to share Christmas Eve with them. Arne
knew Signe and Bergel were bringing some new tree ornaments they had
made—little straw goats, such as _Julenissen_ was supposed to ride.
These would be entrusted to Mother. But Arne couldn’t do that with his
ships. They were to be a surprise for everyone.

The night before Christmas Eve he was still turning the problem over in
his mind when he went to bed, and he stayed awake at least ten minutes,
thinking it over. When he awoke the next morning, the solution had come
to him. It was so simple he laughed out loud. He should have thought of
that right away. He would take Gustav into his confidence, and after the
tree was trimmed they would somehow smuggle in the little ships and hang
them all over the tree.

Gustav agreed readily to this plan. “Say, I want to see those ships,” he
said, and to Arne’s pleasure insisted on going out to the workshop then
and there. “These are good, Arne,” he said, picking up one and another.
“Really good.”

Arne was pleased yet a little shy, too, at the praise. “I did them mostly
for you,” he said, “and when you were so late coming it was awfully hard
to keep at them.”

Gustav nodded. “I can believe that all right, boy, but I’m glad you
stuck,” he said, and his dark eyes were softer than usual. “You
practically built Norway a new merchant fleet here.”

“Now how are we going to get them in there, Gustav?” asked Arne.

“We’ll smuggle them in while the womenfolk are busy about supper. You’ll
have them all bundled up ready, won’t you? We may have to make a foray in
through the parlor window.”

“Commando raid!” said Arne with a grin.

Gustav grinned back and rumpled Arne’s hair so that it stuck up even more
than usual. “That’s right. And on defenseless womenfolk at that. Now I’d
say late this afternoon would be about right. How does that strike you?”

Arne chuckled. “About the time Father fires off the gun that tells us
it’s Christmas Eve. You and I will be putting up the sheaves of grain for
the birds, and it will give us a good chance to get away.”

“You’ve got the idea, boy! And there’s lots to do between then and now.”

There was plenty to do indeed. Mother was calling Arne even as he came
out of the workshop. She had many errands for him, but her voice was so
happy Arne felt he wouldn’t mind running his legs off. Anyway, Christmas
errands were always fun.

There were baskets of good things to be carried to half a dozen houses.
Mother delighted especially in remembering anyone less fortunate than
themselves at Christmas time. And Arne went with Father to get the smoked
and pickled herring that was a favorite part of the _koltbord_ feast.

It was fun, too, to dash in and out of the kitchen where mutton was
roasting for the Christmas Eve supper, where the _lutfisk_ was soaking
ready to be simmered and drenched with butter, where everything was in
the most delightful bustle of preparation.

But whatever he was doing, his mind was not far from those ships he must
get ready to smuggle into the parlor. It was well into the afternoon
before he could find an opportunity to get out to the workshop. He worked
fast yet carefully, grinning to himself as he bundled up the little ships.

Gustav was busy with affairs of his own, back and forth to the dock
many times. Once Arne saw him whisk around the corner of the house with
a large crated affair that made the boy’s hopes go way up. Could it be
possible that the _Stjerne_ had brought him his longed-for bicycle? That
might mean he could take a holiday jaunt next summer, up the fjords and
through the mountain valleys with some of the other boys. Herr Professor
Engstrand was planning to conduct such a trip, he knew, and wouldn’t it
be wonderful if he could go along?

His work was done now, and a good thing, too, for Mother was calling him
to scrub himself thoroughly and get into his new Christmas clothes.

He was just ready when it was time for Father to fire that Christmas
salute. Then Gustav was calling him, and together they went to the barn
to get the two sheaves of grain that were ready to be put up on poles for
the birds. To Arne’s annoyance, Margret for once insisted on helping with
that. She ought to know it was men’s work. Perhaps it was because she was
so glad to have Gustav safe home that she wanted to be with him more than
usual. Arne looked at his brother in despair. How could they manage about
those ships if Margret stuck with them?

But he could see Gustav wasn’t worried, just amused; so he dropped his
own worries and enjoyed the little ceremony as much as the others did.

“I think Mother’s looking for you, Margret,” said Gustav, when the birds
were swooping down on their feast. Margret picked up her full holiday
skirts and ran to the house, while Gustav winked at Arne.

“It was all right, Arne. I did see Mother looking out and beckoning,”
he said, as they hurried off to the workshop. “Now, boy, we work fast.
You’ve got the bundle ready, I see. Good!”

In a twinkling he was around the house, Arne at his heels, and through
the parlor window, taking care not to muss those stiff white curtains.
Without a word he brought out a very small pocket flashlight, and Arne
had hard work not to giggle as they hung the little ships all around the
tree.

It was done so fast that Arne could hardly believe they had finished the
job, but in another moment they were safely around the corner of the
house and sauntering in at the kitchen door.

“Just in time,” said Besta. “Light the candles, you two. I see the folks
coming, Herr Engstrand from one direction and Uncle Jens and his family
from the other.”

Soon the Christmas greeting of “_God Jul_” sounded through the house, and
the guests assembled at that bountiful Christmas Eve table.

Christmas Eve supper was a wonderful meal, but Arne and Bergel could
hardly wait for the parlor doors to open. Bergel was thinking of the
straw goats she had helped Signe make, and Arne was anxious to hear what
the others would say when they saw the boats. Perhaps some of them found
it almost as hard to wait as Bergel and Arne did. When little Knut
slipped down from the table and went straight to that mysterious door,
Mother and Father rose from the table.

That was the signal for everybody to stand up. Father went over to throw
the door open.

There stood the tree in the lovely glow of candlelight—straw goats,
ships, and all.

Arne was sure they had never had a prettier tree. There were all sorts of
delighted comments. But Mother said, “Why, look at those ships! Where did
those lovely things come from? Did you bring them, Gustav?”

“Arne’s the lad who gets the credit for those. He made them all by
himself—one for every person here, from Knut up. How’s that for a good
surprise!”

Arne stood there, his cheeks red, his eyes shining. No one could quite
believe he had done it, and everyone was even more surprised than he had
hoped.

“That took patience as well as skill,” said Herr Engstrand. And perhaps
that quiet comment was the one that pleased Arne most of all.

The straw goats were admired, too, and the other ornaments the girls had
made. Then it was time for the gifts.

There was a beautiful hand-knit blue and red sweater for Arne, with
mittens to match and fine socks for skiing. But when Father trundled a
bicycle out from behind the tree straight toward him, Arne could hardly
see anything else.

Bergel was exclaiming in delight over a small and lovely tea set. And all
the others were just as pleased with their gifts.

In the excitement, Gustav went quietly out of the room, and even Arne did
not notice him. He was eagerly examining his bicycle, turning the wheels,
feeling the pedals, noting every detail of handlebar and seat, headlight
and horn and luggage carrier.

“Herr Professor, do you think I might be big enough to go on that trip
you’re going to conduct next summer?” he asked eagerly. “Now that I have
my bicycle?”

“You’re big enough to suit me. But let’s see what your father says.”

“We will wait to hear what _Julenissen_ says,” answered Herr Dalen, his
eyes twinkling. “If he seems to think you’re a good boy—” He broke off as
a great noise was heard in the hallway and a pair of astonishing figures
burst in.

Everyone laughed and clapped, for here was _Julenissen_ himself, with
his pointed red cap and long whiskers. He was larger than _Julenissen_
really should be, for his feet touched the ground as he bestrode the
straw-trimmed goat, _Julebuken_. But no one minded that, and everyone
screamed and laughed and tried to get out of his way.

There seemed to be no bad children in the Dalen relationship, for
_Julebuken_ stamped about the room without bumping anyone. He went so
fast, _Julenissen_ had hard work to keep up with him, and soon the lively
pair were on their way again, _Julenissen_ explaining, in a voice very
like Gustav’s, that this was a busy night.

“I didn’t get bumped, Father!” cried Arne.

“Must be _Julenissen_ thinks you are a good boy, then,” said his father
gravely, though his eyes twinkled. “I guess that means there’s a summer
trip ahead for you, Arne.”

[Illustration]

And now Mother and Besta brought out the special treat of Yule porridge—a
delicate rice pudding made with spices and milk. Gustav, his hair
somewhat rumpled, was there eating with the others.

“We mustn’t forget the bowl for _Julenissen_,” said Arne, with a sidewise
grin at his brother.

“No, he likes that,” said Gustav soberly, and took another helping.

There would be Christmas songs and games to follow, but first Father read
the Christmas story. At the beginning, Arne’s mind was so full of his
bicycle he could scarcely pay attention. But then a few of the beautiful,
familiar words caught his ear.

“‘When they saw the star, they rejoiced with exceeding great joy,’”
Father was reading.

Why, that’s exactly what they had done, right up here in Nordheim.

Arne thought of the star that had helped guide him to safety on the
mountain. And he remembered what Bergel had said when he was so worried
about Gustav. “The Christmas _Star_ has always come in safe and sure,”
she had said.

Why, of course. The Christmas star was always safe and sure. And wherever
you saw it, it brought “exceeding great joy.” Arne drew a sigh of deep
content and settled to listen. This was really Christmas.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ARNE AND THE CHRISTMAS
STAR ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
